title: Music and Math
date: 2025-12-06
author: Nicholas Carsner
category: Philosopher
tags: developer, dev-journey, music, code
slug: music-and-coding

# in a Tattoo Shop in Providence...

The argument continued between my tattoo artist, Pat, and his colleague over the relationship between math and music. The colleague was a former math professor, and the discussion was around a pair of tattoos on my biceps, a set of proprietary and complimentary mathematical equations. The equations were originally inked by a tattoo artist in Austin during a week my wife and I spent there in 2020. The next year, I had a different artist in Honolulu render a creative border around one of the existing equations, wrapping it in the framework of a chalkboard and adorning it with the state flower, a yellow hibiscus, to add local flavor to it.

This time, the other arm's equation was being framed with the detailed markings of an American football gridrion. Together, these epitomized the messaging I sought to convey: the relationship between seemingly unrelated realms of study or craft, inspired by a personal affinity for sports betting.

---
A long while back, I was between jobs and spent some idle time examining probabilities in lottery jackpots. I started by examining historic drawings, and soon pivoted into empirical mathematical outcomes using factorials and binomial probability:

**Powerball jackpot odds:**
<div style="border: 1px solid #333; padding: 1px; background-color: #2e2e2eff;">

$$
P(\text{Jackpot}) = \frac{1}{\binom{69}{5} \times 26} = {292,201,338:1}
$$
</div>

where five numbers from 1 to 69, and 1 number from 1 to 26 must match.

**Mega Millions** odds <i>(at the time)</i> were even worse:
<div style="border: 1px solid #333; padding: 1px; background-color: #2e2e2eff;">

$$
P(\text{Jackpot}) = \frac{1}{\binom{70}{5} \times 25} = {302,575,350:1}
$$
</div>
where five numbers from 1 to 70, and 1 number from 1 to 25 must match.
Now it's a bonus ball pool of 24 numbers, but the chances are fundamentally the same: <i>remote</i>

---
Having now worked in information technology for about a decade, I not only see the linkage between facets of IT -- programming, coding, integration, polyglot development, QA, process automation, <i>et al</i> -- and music, but I can point to scads of colleagues who have made the transition from musical to development careers also, and who have thrived.

My first semester at [Berklee College of Music](https://www.berklee.edu), my Harmony class was comprised of 20 students that represented almost as many different countries: the US, Germany, Singapore, France, Spain, the UK, Argentina, and more. Adding to it, our professor, [Winnie Dahlgren](https://college.berklee.edu/faculty/winnie-dahlgren), was from Denmark.

Having moved from my hometown, where most of my high school graduating class attending state university and subsequently moved back, I was of just a few peers that left their formative surroundings to see what else the world had to offer. For me, that consisted of relocating to an historic American city and learning within classes of worldwide influence. In those classes at Berklee, we not only spent time learning from and amongst citizens from across the globe, but we performed together, we composed together, we harmonized together, and we created and resolved dissonance together.

---
In technology, there are parallels in resolving dissonance and creating a pleasing arrangement. There are mutual goals in delivering a pleasing product, and in <i>"playing up"</i>, where one's performance is elevated. In music, this can be playing more expressively, or more technically, adding finesse or feeling to one's performance. In technology, this can be learning a new language or technique. It can be done in refactoring or in can be done in debugging. In can be felt in the keystrokes when the solution comes naturally and feels like second nature. It can be felt in the soul.

As we progressed through our major-focused classes, the class sizes would shrink and the feedback would be more candid. Our professors took time to help us refine our creations, rethinking, retooling, and probing through the fine details of our compositions, examine alternatives, and teach us to pause and reflect on our choices. In turn, our peers learned to model this behavior in their feedback. There was no hiding in a class of eight students. Our manuscripts were on display for every eye, and the notes were heard by every ear. The main difference from the classroom environments of my youth and then was the diversity of the students, assembled from corners of the globe rather than my neighborhood streets.

---
The math professor never did figure out what the equations were, but I was happy to explain them. I enjoyed the banter both for and against the relationship between music and math. I have my take, and you may likely have another. To me, the calculus is not in which is right or wrong, but in how long we can enjoy <i>"playing up"</i> while we perform a conversation about it.