title: The Path to Expertise
date: 2025-11-15
author: Nicholas Carsner
category: Student
tags: expertise dev-journey development
slug: 10000-hours

# How Long is 10,000 Hours?

If you have ever read Malcolm Gladwell's seminal work <u>Outliers</u>, you are familiar with <i>"the 10,000 rule,"</i> an approximation metric for achieving expertise in a given field of study or profession. It purports that about 10,000 of intentional practice are required to become an expert. How long does 10,000 hours span? Let's assume an applied practice of 8 hours every day until the requirements are met.

```python
hours = 10_000
working_hours = 8
days_to_expertise = hours / working_hours
days_to_expertise
>>> 1250.0

days_to_expertise / 365.25
>>> 3.4
```

That equates to just under three and a half years to achieve expertise in a given field, given that a full 8 hours every day is committed to intentional study. The parameters are unlikely for the average person, so let's revisit the mathematics with more parameters. Let us assume 260 working days: 52 weeks x 5 weekdays.

```python
days_to_expertise / 260
>>> 4.8
```

By scaling down to a manageable five days per week of, the timeline extends by almost a year and a half; or a <b>40%</b> increase in the timeline, by removing ~28% of working time.

The average worker doesn't work five days every week, either. Let us assume some holidays. I'll use 12 days for this purpose.

```python
days_to_experise / (260 - 12)
>>> 5.0
```

A good round number: 5 years to expertise, working five days a week for five years, taking off only the minimum number of holidays. Most people take more than just the holidays off. Let's assume a modicum of annual leave, sick leave, bereavement leave, or other unanticipated, required absences. Since we are still focused on becoming experts, I will assume two weeks' annual leave and three sick days: 13 days in total.

```python
days_to_expertise / (260 - 12 - 13)
>>> 5.3
```

Taking a little time off only delays the resulting expertise timeline another three months.

One last thing to evalute is how much of the working day can be applied to the intentional practice of developing expertise. Most colleagues I know experience interruptions via email, instant messages, meetings, in-person drop-ins, remote work distractions, performance reviews, required trainings, as so on. To account for this reduction in intentional focus, we will discount the focus down to 80%

```python
days_to_expertise / (260 - 12 - 13) / 0.8
>>> 6.6
```

On top of the considerations for days in a year, working days in a week, number of days taken off, the biggest impact on the finish line is the amount of intentional focus a person can reasonably assume to apply to becoming an expert in one's domain. Working a reasonable schedule, it can take one more than six and a half years to approach the realm of expertise in their field.

---
Let's build a function to see a cross-section of working scenario comparisons. For those working weekends, time off includes those weekend days for paid leave.

```python
def timeline_to_expertise(*, weekdays_only=True, time_off=0, working_hours=8, focus=1):
    hours = 10_000
    days_to_expertise = hours / working_hours
    working_days = 260 if weekdays_only==True else 365.25
    working_days -= time_off
    years_to_expertise = days_to_expertise / working_days
    return years_to_expertise / focus
```

<u>Scenario</u>: <font color='greeb'> 10</font>-hour days | <font color='greeb'>seven</font> days a week | <font color='greeb'>two</font> weeks off annually | <font color='greeb'>100%</font> focus
```python
timeline_to_expertise(weekdays_only=False, time_off=14, working_hours=10)
>>> 2.8
```

<u>Scenario</u>: <font color='greeb'> 12</font>-hour days | <font color='greeb'>five</font> days a week | <font color='greeb'>15</font> days paid leave | <font color='greeb'>90%</font> focus
```python
timeline_to_expertise(time_off=15, working_hours=12, focus=0.9)
>>> 3.8
```

<u>Scenario</u>: <font color='greeb'> 8</font>-hour days | <font color='greeb'>five</font> days a week | <font color='greeb'>5</font> days paid leave | <font color='greeb'>95%</font> focus
```python
timeline_to_expertise(time_off=5, working_hours=8, focus=0.95)
>>> 5.2
```

<u>Scenario</u>: <font color='greeb'> 7.5</font>-hour days | <font color='greeb'>five</font> days a week | <font color='greeb'>25</font> days paid leave | <font color='greeb'>70%</font> focus
```python
timeline_to_expertise(time_off=30, working_hours=7.5, focus=0.7)
>>> 8.3
```
This last example represents approximates my current work environment, according to the dedicated working hours in terms of percentage voiced by my supervisors, based on the state's standard 7 1/2 workday, includes 14 state holidays plus 16 additional days of personal leave.

To become an expert in my current field using this calculus means it will take just shy of 8 1/2 years.