title: There Are Two Guarantees in This Life 
date: 2025-11-30
author: Nicholas Carsner
category: Student
tags: dev-journey, development
slug: version-two

# Death & Taxes

There are also software updates. This used to be a more labor intensive process - buying a packaged box of a CD-ROM, inserting it into the drive, following the installer's directions, and then meandering through the slow learning curve of what features were unsupported in the new version, and having little-to-no sense of bug patches or security vulnerabilities. Obviously, this predates the current state of open source and downloadable installers.

With the speed-to-velocity of contemporary software packaging and version control practices, it is very common to see publications occurring regularly whether enhancements, bug fixes, or security patches before a release is constituted to be a major one. My coach, Bob, summarized develop steps to me simply:

1. Working
2. Pretty
3. Fast

<font color='lightgreen'><b>Version 1:</b></font> the MVP <i>(Minimum Viable Product, or Minimum Loveable Product)</i>
- the functional framework: assemble the code. Get it working. Get it out there.

<font color='aqua'><b>Version 2:</b></font> the enhancement
- add <i>nice-to-haves</i> and additional features, clean up bugs, add robust testing.

<font color='yellow'><b>Version 3:</b></font> the refactor
- cache common queries, break down complex functions, optimize data structures, converted nested loops into list comprehensions, use standard library tools, and remove redundant code.
<i>

```bash
"Perfect is the enemy of good."
```
</i>

As a former perfectionist, I have found this perspective to be cognitively freeing, in addition to being materially productive. Frequently, I used perfectionism as a synonym for procrastination, citing the lack of idyllic performance as an antithesis to presentable quality. Features that could-have-been regressed into classroom exercises and theoretical constructs, rather than feeding needed functionality in the pipeline of an application.

Since my perfectionist days, I've now worked on development teams, participated in code reviews, implemented requested changes, submitted pull requests, published open source software packages, been subject to feedback from peers and superiors, and also welcomed feedback form peers and superiors. The biggest takeaway is that I've learned to be less afraid of version 1 or an alpha release, because...

There's always a version two.