title: Better Customer Service
date: 2025-12-27
author: Nicholas Carsner
category: Student
tags: dev-journey, development, customer, war-stories
slug: better-customer-service

# (or How I Learned to be a Better Customer)

During brunch one weekend, my wife and I listened to a bartender friend of ours regale us with a story about an obnoxious guest she had dealt with a few days previous. This was the kind of interaction where an impatient and/or overserved _(a diplomatic and understated southern euphemism)_ patron made a scene, criticizing the server(s) for their non-johnny-on-the-spot response to his beverage request. Our friend's response, _"You want better service? Be a better customer."_

Having worked in the service industry for several years, this resonates. We've all heard _"the customer is always right,"_ but sometimes the customer is _also_ misinformed...or hasty...or distracted...or ineloquent. At the receiving end of the customer request, it's not a military-style give-and-take where sarge says _"jump"_ and we ask _"how high??"_, it's the [XY Problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XY_problem), methodically and intentionally participating in the request to help the customer, biased toward a preconceived solution for the issue, remove the scales from their eyes and see the forest for the trees. Okay, that's enough adages in one section.

---

I've been umpiring youth baseball for the past 13 years. I began in recreational leagues, getting paid practically nothing to officiate what was basically beer-league softball. I had a good and attentive mentor who first trained me the key points I pass on to others today:
- be in position and on time
- see the play, make the call
- be prepared to explain what you saw

Those are the basics. There's a score of experience added to those basic descriptors:
- hustle
- give and demand respect
- someone's going to be unhappy with every call you make

There are are handful of useful add-ons I've developed over the years:
- keep up the pace of the game
- be the most informed individual on the field
- be deliberate _(even if you're not sure, do it with purpose)_

This past year, I was honored to represent our local umpires' association at the state high school tournament, in my third year with the organization. For years, I had worked up to 200 games a season, laboring in bulk to amass enough extra cash to pay off credit card debt and student loans. Before this past season began, I remarked to my wife that I intended to start approaching umpiring as a hobby, rather than a second job. Was it coincidence that I was selected in the first year that I adopted this mindset?

There are pitchers and batters who disagreed with my zone, whether all season or game-to-game. There are coaches who thought I was out there to _"big league"_ them; ignoring their rants and ravings. There are fans in the crowd who thought I was the _"worst (they'd) ever seen"_ and parents who couldn't believe I was getting paid to do it. Nonetheless, I didn't show up on a field to do a poor job. I didn't spend my nights and weekends doing something I resented, because I needed it to make ends meet. When you remove that overhead noise from your motivation, it's surprising how much more enjoyable the job becomes. I loved getting dressed, stepping onto the field with a clear delineation between my workday self and my on-field persona, and presenting myself with a readiness to serve.

I got to tackle on-field disputes with a renewed sense of diplomacy, starting coach conversations with, _"how can I help?"_ rather than _"I know what I saw"_ or trying to impose my resolve before I really listened. It prompted me to adopt a position of listening first. It's a skill I observe in others, and is something I wish I possessed and practiced more intrinsically, but it's still something I have to consciously work at.

---

So how do you get better customer service?
Be a better customer.

The power dynamic is a struggle for some, who have an expectation of service staff: subservient and obedient. It's a similar expectation on the field of the men in blue: authoritarian and egotistic. I'll grant you: I _have_ worked with those folks from time-to-time _(and I've had my own bad days too)_, but the majority of my colleagues on the field are doing their very best. They want to know that their zone is consistent, that they made the right call, that they were in the right position, and that they're keeping the game flowing; leaving the outcome to be decided by the players on the field.

Getting to add a better service interaction for the players and coaches? It makes the game I've loved all my life a little more enjoyable, even after 13 seasons.
