title: Why Python?
date: 2025-12-13
author: Nicholas Carsner
category: User
tags: dev-journey, personality, roots
slug: why-python

# "So...why Python?"

My wife asked me this while we were out to supper one night, a few weeks before I was to complete my Professional Python Developer Certificate with Pybites. It was to be my second completed Python certification of the year, a goal I had set early in 2025. Fortunately, "Python" has become used so often and ubiquitously in our house, she doesn't blink when I mention something about a new technique or module I came across or toyed with that day. But <i>why Python?</i>

I had a brief introduction to programming in my youth courtesy of [BASIC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodore_BASIC) on our family's Commodore 64. The low barrier-to-entry concept of loops and iterations was intiutive to me, although I didn't expand my familiarity at the time.

```basic
10 FOR I = 1 TO 10
20   PRINT "VALUE: "; I
30 NEXT I
40 END
```
The next significant chapter wasn't until about 10 years ago, when I discovered that the structure of Microsoft Excel provided infrastructure that resonated with my analytical mind. I spent six months on the sofa after work every night, analyzing data sets and tried to compose efficient formulas that did want I suspected they could do. It took experimentation, and failure...and excessive memory consumption errors. The results were still empowering...

- _Return the last value in a column_
```excel
=LOOKUP(2,1/(A:A<>""),A:A)
```
- _Find certain text within a range_
```excel
=IF(ISTEXT(SEARCH("text",A1)),"True","False")
```
- _Return a match from a column given multiple other column criteria_
```excel
=INDEX(C:C,MATCH(1,INDEX(("ValueA"=A:A)*("ValueB"=B:B),0,1),0))
```

About six months after I was promoted as an analyst, I enrolled in a data science jumpstart, a sort of fantasy camp version of a conventional bootcamp. We worked with Jupyter notebooks and Pandas dataframes mostly, rendering visualizations with Matplotlib and Folium.

---
When I stared working for the State of Tennessee, I was semi-positioned as taking over as <i>"the Python guy"</i> for the previous team member who had left for work in the private sector. In my first month, I was tasked with learning PowerShell to implement some process automation in our domain. In December, most tenured state employees have enough PTO accrued that the offices are fairly vacant, and email and IM chatter is scarce. I was able to lock in a focus on writing some simple file management scripts, and it wasn't long before the layout of my PowerShell code began to look similarly to my Python scripts <i>(my VBA scripts too, now that I think about it)</i> - indented spacing, easy to read nested loops, and enough comments to be kind to my future self.

Not only was the residue of my early Python writing spilling over into my new language learning, it began to feel more natural and sensible. In 2023, I attended my first PyCon US conference. It did not take many tutorial sessions or breakfast conversations to realize that I was still a newbie as far as understanding the key necessities of the language, especially object-oriented programming (OOP), but the conversations also begat trust in other Pythonistas who were all manner of encouraging and eager to share ideas on how I could improve my skillsets, further cementing the inherent feeling of Brett Cannon's heralded quote, <i>"Come for the language, stay for the community,"</i> despite the palpable lack of a Python community in the Nashville area, a region technically dominated by either mobile or .NET development.

---
So <i>"why Python?"</i>

- It makes sense.
- It feels natural.
- What are we trying to do? -- I think we can do that in Python.
- No build step.
- Open source = no licensing cost
- Open source = global contributors
- Open source = global accountability

Coincidentally, the Python Software Foundation is headquartered in my hometown.

Maybe it's serendipity.
